---
layout: post
title: Research trip to Hungary
date: 2024-01-15
inline: false
---

On my way back to US after a few weeks in Europe to visit my family for the holidays, I did a short (but productive and engaging) research trip to Hungary to meet and discuss with my collaborators Marco Pignatari and Maria Lugaro at the [Konkoly Observatory](https://konkoly.hu/en) in Budapest. We discussed about a variety of topics, including core collapse supernovae, presolar grains and the γ-process. I also made a day-trip visit to my friends at [ATOMKI](https://www.atomki.hu/en/) in Debrecen (Gábor Kiss, György Gyürky, Zslot Fülöp and others). It was a really chilly day with a bit of snow covering the ground, but the hospitality we received was amazing. I gave a seminar for the students and the local research group and they gave me a tour of their facility. I was really impressed by the breadth of research activities the lab has to offer. We discussed about my current research projects and future plans. I look forward to visit them again in the near future!

---
<center>
    <div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
          {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/Hungary-1.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="Night view from Liberty bridge in Budapest"%}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/Hungary-2.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="2 MV Tandetron accelerator at ATOMKI"%}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/Hungary-3.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="γ-ray detection setup for activation measurements"%}
        </div>
    </div>
</center>
