---
layout: post
title: Winter Nuclear and Particle Physics Conference 🏔️
date: 2026-02-13
inline: false
---

I recently returned from a wonderful half-week at the [Winter Nuclear and
Particle Physics Conference](Winter Nuclear and Particle Physics Conference)
in Banff.
It was an honor to be invited as a new member of the Canadian nuclear
physics faculty to present my research on γ-rays from long-lived radionuclides
and core-collapse supernovae.
The scientific program was great, but the highlight was
seeing the next generation of physicists in action.
The student presentations and posters were truly fantastic and of very high quality.
A special congratulations goes to Dhruval Shah (McMaster University). I have
the pleasure of co-supervising his MSc thesis,
and it was a proud moment to see him receive an honourable mention for his talk on the 18O(α,γ)22Ne reaction using the DRAGON facility.

Beyond the physics, it was also the first time I’ve celebrated my birthday in a conference setting!
It was the perfect environment to reconnect with old friends and making new collaborations within the Canadian subatomic physics community.

Huge thanks to Heather Russell (UVic), Alain Bellerive (Carleton), and the entire organizing committee for putting together such an engaging and memorable meeting.

---
<center>
    <div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
          {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/wnppc.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="With Annika and Dhruval"%}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/wnppc-2.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="Conference Group picture"%}
        </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-2 mt-md-0">
            {% include figure.html path="/assets/img/wnppc-3.jpg" width="57%" class="img-fluid" zoomable=true caption="Beautiful Lake Louise"%}
        </div>
    </div>
</center>
